title: Getting bytes to disk more quickly
date: 2021-03-26 14:00
author: Ludovic Courtès
tags: Reproducible builds, Scheme API
---

Let’s face it: functional package managers like Guix provide unequaled
support for reproducibility and transactional upgrades, but the price to
pay is that users often spend a fair amount of time downloading (or
building) packages.  Download times are okay on day-to-day use but
they’re a pain point when performing large upgrades or when installing
Guix System for the first time.

With that in mind, it should come as no surprise that Michael
Stapelberg’s [excellent 2020 Arch Linux Conference
talk](https://media.ccc.de/v/arch-conf-online-2020-6387-distri-researching-fast-linux-package-management)
and the installation speed achieved by distri were a great motivation
boost.  Michael proposes radical ideas to speed up package installation,
such as downloading and mounting ready-to-use SquashFS images.  Not
everything can be transposed to Guix as-is, but it certainly got us
thinking.

This article dives into improvements made over the last few months that
will be in the upcoming 1.2.1 release, and which are already [one `guix
pull`
away](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Upgrading-Guix.html);
they all contribute to making [substitute
download](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Substitutes.html) and
installation “faster”.  This is an evolution of the existing mechanisms
rather than a revolution, but one that users will surely welcome.

# Reducing latency

One of the first things we notice is latency between subsequent
substitute downloads.  It may sound ridiculous, but `guix-daemon` would
spawn one helper process (running the internal `guix substitute`
command) for each substitute download.  That means that not only would
it create a new process each time, it would also be unable to reuse
connections to the substitute servers.  This is particularly noticeable
and wasteful when downloading many substitutes in a row, such as when
installing Guix System for the first time.

The latency in between subsequent substitute downloads was primarily
this: `fork` (creating a new process), TCP connection establishment and
TLS connection handshake.  When running `perf timechart record guix
build …` (what a wonderful tool [`perf
timechart`](https://perf.wiki.kernel.org/) is!), we get this Gantt
diagram, which gives an idea of all the time wasted creating these
processes, waiting for them to initialize and connect to the substitute
server, and so on:

![Gantt diagram without substitute agent.](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/issue/45018/attachment/8/1)

Why was it done this way?  Because the daemon, written in C++ and
inherited from Nix, would historically delegate substitution to helper
programs, with a flexible but naive protocol between the daemon and
those helper programs.

Back in December, we [tackled this
issue](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/45018)
([followup](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/45253)): the daemon would now
launch a single `guix substitute` process and reuse it for subsequent
substitute downloads.  In turn, `guix substitute` would cache
connections so we save time on connection establishment.

Another observation we made is that `guix-daemon` implemented
post-processing steps after each download that would contribute to
latency.  Once `guix substitute` had completed a download and extracted
the archive to the store, the daemon would traverse this store item a
couple of times to reset file timestamps/permissions (“_metadata
canonicalization_”), to deduplicate files, and to verify the integrity
of the whole store item.  This is I/O-intensive and particularly
wasteful for store items with many files.  Our next step was to delegate
all this work to `guix substitute`, which allows it to [pipeline archive
extraction, integrity checks, deduplication, and metadata
canonicalization](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/45253).  All this happens
as the bytes flow in and no extra traversal is needed.

The speedup offered by these optimizations depends on several factors,
including the latency of your network, the speed of your CPU and that of
your hard disk, and it grows with the number of substitutes fetched in a
row.  What we can say is that even in a “favorable”
situation—low-latency network, fast CPU, fast storage device—it
definitely feels snappier.

# Increasing bandwidth

With the latency issue pretty much solved, the next step was to look at
bandwidth.  When we [introduced lzip-compressed
substitutes](https://guix.gnu.org/en/blog/2019/substitutes-are-now-available-as-lzip/)
back in 2019, the assumption was that a much higher compression ratio
(compared to gzip), would inevitably translate to faster downloads.
That is true… but only for some bandwidth/CPU power configurations.

Specifically, it turns out that, for someone with a fast connection,
such as fiber-to-the-home (FTTH), [downloads of lzip-compressed
substitutes are actually
CPU-bound](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2020-12/msg00177.html).
In other words, the limiting factor is the processing time to decompress
those lzip’d archives—not the available bandwidth.  Lzip currently
achieves the best compression ratios so far, and that’s great, but
decompression is compute-intensive.

Ever-increasing bandwidth is what drove the design and implementation of
newer compression methods, such as “Z standard”, colloquially known as
[“zstd”](https://facebook.github.io/zstd/).  The decompression speed of
zstd is on the order of 3.5 higher than that of gzip and an order of
magnitude higher than that of lzip; but unlike the venerable
[lzo](http://www.oberhumer.com/opensource/lzo), zstd achieves high
compression ratios: at level 19, the compression ratio of zstd is lower
than that of lzip but in the same ballpark.  Guillaume Le Vaillant
[provided](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2021-01/msg00097.html)
an insightful comparison of gzip, lzip, and zstd on a plot showing their
decompression speed as a function of the compression ratio:

![Decompression speed vs. compression ratio of gzip, lzip, and zstd.](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2021-01/pngFOHKzO4aVW.png)

There are several takeaways.  First, zstd decompression is always faster
than the alternatives.  Second, zstd compresses better than gzip
starting from level 2, so gzip “loses” on both criteria.  Last, zstd at
level 19 achieves a compression ratio comparable to lzip level 5 or
6—lzip level 9 remains better in that regard.

With brand new [Guile bindings to
zstd](https://notabug.org/guile-zstd/guile-zstd), we were able to add
zstd support to [`guix
publish`](https://guix.gnu.org/manual/en/html_node/Invoking-guix-publish.html)
and `guix substitute`.  But what policy should be adopted for the
official substitute server at `ci.guix.gnu.org`?

Our goal is to maximize substitute download speed.  In some
configurations, for example on relatively slow connections, fetching
lzip substitutes is not CPU-bound; in those cases, fetching lzip
substitutes remains the fastest option.  And of course, there are these
other configurations where lzip decompression is the limiting factor,
and where we’d rather fetch a slightly less compressed zstd substitute
(or even a much less compressed gzip substitutes, sometimes).

The solution we came up with is a naive but efficient solution:
[client-side adaptive compression
selection](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/47137).  When it fetches and
decompresses a substitute, `guix substitute` monitors its CPU usage as
reported by
[`times`](https://www.gnu.org/software/libc/manual/html_node/Processor-Time.html#index-times).
If the user time to wall-clock time ratio is close to one, that probably
means the substitute fetch and decompression process was CPU-bound; in
that case, choose a compression method that yields faster decompression
next time—assuming the substitute server offers several options.
Conversely, if CPU usage is close to zero, the process is probably
network-bound, so next time we’ll choose a better-compressed option.

The official server at `ci.guix.gnu.org` now provides zstd-compressed
substitutes in addition to lzip and gzip.  An [extra
complication](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2021-03/msg00333.html)
is that we cannot drop gzip compression just yet because pre-1.1.0 Guix
installations understand nothing but gzip.  To ease transition, the
server will probably offer substitutes in all three compression formats
for one more year or so.

There’s a good reason to upgrade your daemon though: you’ll be able to
benefit from those zstd substitutes and if you have high bandwidth,
you’ll quickly see the difference!

# Grabbing substitutes from your neighbors

When it comes to increasing download speeds, another option is to
download from your neighbors rather than from a server far away.  This
is particularly useful at the workplace, where machines around you are
likely to already have the store items you’re looking for, or, say, at
Guix gatherings—at least when we can meet physically again…

The idea had been [floating
around](https://guix.gnu.org/en/blog/2017/reproducible-builds-a-status-update/)
for some time as a direct benefit of [reproducible
builds](https://reproducible-builds.org/) and co-maintainer Mathieu
Othacehe [recently implemented
it](https://othacehe.org/substitute-server-discovery.html).  As Mathieu
explains in his blog post, `guix publish` can now advertise itself on
the local network using the mDNS/DNS-SD protocol _via_
[Avahi](https://avahi.org); when `guix-daemon` is passed the
`--discover` option, `guix substitute` automatically discovers local
substitute servers and adds them as the preferred download location.
The Guix System installation image even allows you to enable it to speed
up the installation process:

![Enabling substitute server discovery when installing Guix System.](https://othacehe.org/files/substitute.png)

Again, that only speeds things up if substitute servers use a
compression method with fast decompression, and with either a cache or
fast compression if they compress things on the fly.  Zstd comes in
handy for that: Guillaume’s measurements show that [zstd compression is
inexpensive at low compression levels, while achieving higher
compression ratios than
gzip](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2021-01/pnglYLfp1DXNC.png).

# Going further

Put together, these changes have the potential to noticeably improve
user experience.  But as I wrote in the introduction, it’s not
revolutionary either—users still have to download all these things.

The next big step might come from fetching substitutes over
peer-to-peer, content-addressed networks such as
[IPFS](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/33899) or
[GNUnet](https://issues.guix.gnu.org/46800#3).  Their content-addressed
nature could allow users to download less.  The performance
characteristics of these networks is less clear though.

There is still value in a plain HTTP-based substitute protocol like the
one currently used that is easy to set up, though.  In that spirit, an
option would be to “upgrade” the existing substitute protocol to take
advantage of content-addressability.  After all, the daemon already
performs file-level deduplication and there’s [a fair amount of
identical files between subsequent builds of the same
package](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2020-12/msg00258.html).
So… [what if we only downloaded those files not already available
locally?](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/guix-devel/2021-01/msg00080.html)
This idea is appealing but we need to go beyond the prototyping phase to
get a better idea of its viability.

For completeness, another option currently investigated by the Nix
developers is that of “_content-addressed derivations_”.  While
currently store file names contain a hash of the _inputs_ used to
produce them, the idea of content-addressed derivations is to make it a
content hash; that way, if an input change has no effect on the build
result, the output is the same and nothing needs to be re-downloaded
(this is what Eelco Dolstra described as the _intensional model_ in
Chapter 6 of his [seminal PhD
thesis](http://nixos.org/~eelco/pubs/phd-thesis.pdf)).  This option is
appealing, also for other reasons, but it’s a fundamental change with
what looks like a [high implementation complexity and transition
cost](https://github.com/tweag/rfcs/blob/cas-rfc/rfcs/0062-content-addressed-paths.md).
We have yet to gauge the pros and cons of following this approach.

Until then, we hope Guix 1.2.1 will bring your faster substitutes and
happiness!

#### About GNU Guix

[GNU Guix](https://guix.gnu.org) is a transactional package manager and
an advanced distribution of the GNU system that [respects user
freedom](https://www.gnu.org/distros/free-system-distribution-guidelines.html).
Guix can be used on top of any system running the Hurd or the Linux
kernel, or it can be used as a standalone operating system distribution
for i686, x86_64, ARMv7, and AArch64 machines.

In addition to standard package management features, Guix supports
transactional upgrades and roll-backs, unprivileged package management,
per-user profiles, and garbage collection.  When used as a standalone
GNU/Linux distribution, Guix offers a declarative, stateless approach to
operating system configuration management.  Guix is highly customizable
and hackable through [Guile](https://www.gnu.org/software/guile)
programming interfaces and extensions to the
[Scheme](http://schemers.org) language.
